I'm George Brown Drouin guitars
Nashville Tennessee here top left the
vintage instruments and new designs and
virtually anything else comes along what
we have here is a 1955 Les Paul Custom
and a 1958 Les Paul Custom and as you
can see they have quite a different
pickup arrangement one has two pickups
the alnico five rhythm pickup single
coil with adjustable height rectangular
magnets and a standard p90 black plastic
soap bar pickup in the bridge position
and the other has three patent applied
for humbucking pickups the early version
of the Les Paul Custom first came out in
late 1953 didn't appear in catalog
literature until 54 it has a mahogany
body with a carved top and the top is
simply carved from the mahogany unlike
the gold top Les Paul's or the later Les
Paul standard with the sunburst finish
these do not have a maple top
it has a mahogany neck with an ebony
fingerboard versus the Brazilian
rosewood on the gold top Les Paul's all
the other Les Paul's in the 50s had
Brazilian rosewood fingerboard but just
had evany which was considered to be the
more deluxe wood it has single binding
on the neck
it has big pearl block inlays versus the
gold tops which have pearloid plastic
this has the Gibson and split diamond
shaped pearl peghead in legs has the
clues on waffle back tuners which are
more expensive than the clues on deluxe
tuners that were used on the sunburst
Les Paul's this guitar
cost 375 dollars new back when the
original sunburst Les Paul which today
is big big bucks cost
265 but price when new and value now
doesn't necessarily have much
relationship the Les Paul Custom came
out with a so-called fretless wonder
frets very very low frets which almost
feel like they're not their Les Paul
with a fancy jazz player he didn't bend
notes he used heavy flat-wound strings
the fretless wonder frets and very low
action with very heavy flat wound
strings are exactly what he wanted he
didn't want big high frets
he wasn't bending notes the Les Paul
Custom was therefore set up to suit him
hello even there he didn't like the
electronics uneasy Oh with customized
his own he hardly played anything that
he didn't monkey with so everything he
played was completely customized often
by himself and very very crudely but it
worked but it was still like having a
rolls-royce held together with bondo and
baling wire his workmanship was
atrocious but he got the result he was
looking for for sock so far his sound he
also preferred low impedance pickups and
all guitar makers today pretty well have
high impedance electronics and their
guitars which is very antiquated when
you start thinking about the recording
industry
in mid 57 Gibson switched the specs to
three humbucking pickups but they still
wired it with just a three position
switch so you can get this pickup you
can get this pickup you can't get all
three but you can get the middle
position is these two out of phase so
what you have is a normal sounding lead
a normal sounding rhythm and a super
twangy middle position where is really
most people for the middle position they
want these two and they want a nice mid
sound which this doesn't offer so this
model never really caught on they sold a
fair number of them the players in the
50s but so far as players like
Bloomfield R&B players never liked this
and today this guitar is worth a whole
lot less than a Les Paul
sunburst of the same age a sunburst Les
Paul of this age with beautifully
figured wood could be easily $200,000 or
more this guitar is $45,000 and the
other one here is priced at 30,000 for
the 55 which actually is also less than
when they were at the height of the
bubble
so list price when new does not
necessarily equate to what they will be
worth now the same with art if you had
known when to buy an Andy Warhol picture
some of those things were $1,500 new are
in the millions of dollars now and there
are some artists who were very very
successful in their lifetime who are
forgotten when they're dead and vice
versa Vincent van Gogh never sold a
single painting in his entire lifetime
and one reason he committed suicide is
when he found out that his brother had
been lying to him about actually having
sold some and he hadn't been able to
sell a single one Vincent was so
distraught he shot himself but hopefully
our listeners won't feel quite as
distraught about some of their own
investments and will hope that guitars
in general do better than Vincent's
paintings did in his lifetime but keep
in mind Vincent's paintings have done
mighty well since then and prices are
ephemeral information on the guitars is
almost eternal what this is isn't going
to change the monetary price that
someone may be willing to pay will
change so a video done giving a price
may be accurate at that moment but may
seem ludicrously off a decade later but
the other information about the guitar
if it was accurately identified that
informational adjust is valid a hundred
years from now
but there it is 1955 was Paul custom and
1958 Les Paul Custom